The following programme contains
strong language. strong violence.
Downloaded from
YTS.MX
and adult themes from the start.
Official YIFY movies site:
YTS.MX
Ten songs in a row
and a better mix of music
on the official radio station
of summer.
C'etait Soul II Soul. Keep on
Moving. en souvenir de CKMF.
It is 24 degrees in Montreal.
I'm John Moore and this is a 980
Hits information update.
Twist and Shout from the Beatles.
97.7 FM in Montreal. Good Morning!
What a morning!
Sidney Leithman died
early this morning
in his luxury imported convertible
on his way to a health club
in this middle-class
Montreal suburb.
Police believe an accomplice in
another car blocked Leithman's path
while the assassin. a professional.
carefully fired six bullets
into the sitting target.
Sidney Leithman was the most
successful criminal lawyer
in the city.
He was really at the top
of his game.
He loved what he did.
He loved to perform in court.
I'd rather be pleading.
than waiting for a verdict.
Defence lawyers tended
to stick to one mob.
He represented the Mafia.
the Columbians.
And he had the West End Gang.
All of these organised crime
groups battled to control
the cocaine industry in Montreal.
By then. we should have.
hopefully.
some idea of the nature of
the proof. if any.
The killing of Sidney Leithman
was not just the death
of Sidney Leithman. it gave life
to a whole new story.
When the police start going through
Sidney's clothing.
in one of his pockets they find
a hand-written phone number.
That phone number was the key that
opened the door to the power
of the drug trade and the massive
corruption that it had created.
Montreal is a very sexy.
appealing. seductive city.
It became perhaps the most
criminal city in North America.
A lot of us became acquainted with
the criminal element.
the criminal character of Montreal
at a very early age.
You're a kid and you're going to
the candy store
and up there is Allo Police.
a weekly crime tabloid.
What other city has
a weekly crime tabloid?
Well. in fact. Montreal had two
weekly crime tabloids!
And in Montreal.
criminals can be heroes.
When I was a kid.
my father was a city columnist for
The Montreal Star
and he covered the waterfront.
I remember one time he had a desk at
home and there were all these
mugshots of the West End Gang.
So I was fascinated by
these mugshots.
The West End Gang was legendary.
Dunie Ryan was a very. very. very
sharp criminal operator.
Very intelligent guy.
He's at the top.
Allan Ross was Dunie Ryan's
right hand man.
He was considered
a nasty piece of work.
Gerry Matticks was like a toll
booth through the Port.
He could get your big shipment of
cocaine through
but that came with a price.
The West End Gang is great because
it's actually not a gang.
it's a network of people.
It's very flexible.
You also don't give the police
a structure to look at.
...26 tonnes found at
the port of Montreal.
On board 200 million
dollars of pure cocaine.
The West End Gang was
an extraordinary surprise to us.
You've got small time hoods that
rose up and had the initiative
to go down and meet personally with
Colombian Cartel guys
- that's ambition.
that's gutsy too.
Those are dangerous people.
They became an organisation
with global power.
an organisation that imports
tons and tons of cocaine
into the United States
and into Canada.
Montreal had pretty solid divides
with its various gangs.
On the East end. you would have
the French Canadian Gangs.
In the North End you had
the Italian Mafia.
And in the West. you had
the West End Gang -
the Irish neighbourhood gangsters.
When I was a kid. the West End
neighbourhood was a perfect
breeding ground for that gang
to rise up there.
Everybody knew someone.
a family member. a close friend.
who was in some way absolutely
connected to the West End Gang.
When my dad was in his early 30s
he went into the police department.
but then he saw
a side that he didn't like.
that he realised they weren't
necessarily the good guys.
And the gangs were the bad guys.
So he was disillusioned
and he eventually left.
Later on as a kid. I heard him being
referred to as "the enforcer"
and I asked my mother about it and
said "Mom. what does that mean?"
and she just pretended
she didn't hear me
and never did answer the question.
The members of the West End Gang.
they grew up poor. All of them.
And it was a hardscrabble life.
They were tough. Irish.
working-class kids
who grew up with similar backgrounds
and that made them
very tough criminals.
How old were you when you
robbed your first bank?
Fourteen.
Fourteen?
Yeah.
Pulling out the gun.
jumping up on the counter
doing like they do in the movies.
you know.
and wanting the money
and they could see it.
Welcome to Montreal!
It's just another normal day in
the bank robbery capital
of North America.
The West End Gang had
the best safe crackers.
had the best armed robbery guys.
This is one of about 800 bank
holdups in the city every year.
Montreal has more of these little
scenes than any other city
on this continent.
more than Chicago.
more than Los Angeles.
more even than New York.
They got all the bases covered.
They got locksmiths.
they got communications guys
and electricians and truck drivers.
inside guys to do a job.
Bank robberies
in the sixties and seventies.
it was like going to bingo.
It was super popular.
It was an easy. quick way
to get some money.
One of my uncles. "Uncle Richard"
was a huge bank robber at the time
and was considered a handsome.
smiling guy because he was
always very polite.
He used to say
there is no point in scaring them.
He would be very polite about it.
Wells Fargo guards with revolvers
drawn stood guard outside
the Sun life building.
According to the Police.
at a quarter to 12 Wells Fargo men
entered the building...
We used to rob a minimum of three
banks a week. some twice.
That's how open they were.
Everybody was robbing banks.
it was in and out.
it was quick. it was easy.
Like. one manager knew
it was me again!
Back in those days.
things were really. really happening
in Montreal. You say to yourself:
"Imagine this happening today?"
It was a crazy. crazy time.
Everybody was a bank robber.
Dunie Ryan was a kind of punk.
By the time he was 19.
he had already been in juvenile
detention homes a couple of times.
He was well immersed in that life.
He was a thief.
He was robbing jewellery stores.
If you opened at nine. they were
there with a gun to your head
to help you open up the store.
you know. and take what you had.
In his 20's he's involved
in armed robberies.
He goes on a trip to the U.S.
with some guys
and they are going to do
a string of bank robberies
and they get jacked.
They get caught in
Lynn. Massachusetts. near Boston.
He was in a penitentiary for
five years in the U.S.
Now 30 years old.
he comes back to Montreal
and that's when he forms what would
be known as the West End Gang.
In 1961. I was 22 years old
and I decided to join
the police force.
You made yourself a reputation.
you know.
and I was glad of my reputation.
You know.
don't fuck around with Savard.
Andre Savard -
top of the cop list in Montreal.
Would do anything to make an arrest
within the boundaries of the law.
He took crap from no one.
My first job. standing guard
at the Botanical Garden.
You know. I'm armed with a gun
and I'm a police officer
and don't step on the flowers.
you know.
If you do. well.
who knows what's going to happen.
So I needed some action.
some real police work.
The hold up squad was busier
than at any other time.
because the capital of robbery
was Montreal.
That started the whole thing with me
working at the Holdup Squad.
The West End Gang were considered
good 'bad guys' in the sense that
initially they were not dealing
drugs. they had not killed anybody.
There was a guy John Slawvey.
that was part of the Gang.
They called him Big John.
Big John Slawvey.
because he weighed something
like 240 pounds
and he also was really mean.
He hated cops with a vengeance.
Dunie was close to Slawvey
and he was a big guy.
Dunie liked him a lot.
There was a cop that was doing
traffic. he was in front of Simpsons
and he was writing a ticket
and John Slawvey with two other guys
came out of the Simpsons Building
because they just
committed an armed robbery.
They could have left.
the cop was writing a ticket -
he wouldn't see this.
they were in the back of him.
So he yelled at the cop. Slawvey.
so the cop turned around...
..almost cut him in half. you know.
with a machine gun.
It didn't take long for police to
find out from their informants
that John Slawvey was the killer.
but they didn't have enough evidence
to arrest him.
Later on we heard about him.
that he was glad at what he did.
it was like a trophy for him.
He used to go shoot at some target
and write" police" on top.
you know. just shoot him.
For a long time. the West End Gang
was just a bunch of guys
from the Irish neighbourhood.
It wasn't until they started killing
people that they became a threat.
They are frightening people.
They would kill you as soon
as they looked at you.
They just don't care.
The eyes of the world were all
on Montreal in 1976
because of the arrival
of the Olympics.
Law and order suddenly became
critical in presenting
a clean image to the world.
Unfortunately the reality basically
whacked them in the face.
It was a crime that stunned
the Montreal police
because of its audacity.
The Brinks truck arrived
at the bank to pick up currency
in all denominations.
Gunmen in a white van backed up
behind the truck.
blocking the alley.
And when the door was flung open.
the remaining guard faced this:
a 50 calibre anti-aircraft gun.
The driver of the second vehicle got
out and went to the door
of the Brinks truck.
'Open the truck.'
Those were the only words said
during the whole affair
and they were said in English.
The gunmen escaped with the largest
holdup haul in Quebec history:
$2.8 million dollars.
SAVARD:
It was definitely the West End Gang.
Because nobody else could be
involved in such a robbery.
We knew that the Irish organised
crime in Boston and Montreal
are connected.
Who is gonna be able to get
a 50-calibre machine gun?
But of course it comes from
the States. you know.
and who's got those contacts?
Police say they know who is
responsible. they just don't have
enough evidence to make
the charges stick.
I went to see my boss.
the inspector. at the time.
I asked him.
"Why don't you let me do something."
He told me "Yes you can do it.
Andre. but be careful.
Don't overdo it."
I had a tendency of overdoing it.
"Don't be a Dirty Harry."
that's what he was telling me.
In order to shake
the organised crime.
the best way we could. legally. was
to do some things that weren't done.
You were stepping out of the rule
book a little bit. you know.
Police! Open the door.
O'CONNOR: They went about rousting
people they thought might be members
of the West End Gang.
Hands up police. Come on. Open up.
Night after night after night.
they would go to different places
where they knew West End Gang
members would hang out
and they would find guns.
they would find money
but nothing directly connected to
the Brinks robbery.
We hit all these places.
Nittolo's. Peg's -
every motel we hit them. you know.
We're bothering the West End Gang.
Dunie Ryan did not take kindly to
the fact that they were being
rousted
night after night by Andre Savard.
I'm patrolling near Motel Peg
with one of my men.
and that's what we did before
we're going to hit some place.
I was driving the car and passing
Motel Peg's. we heard a loud bang.
I didn't know what it was.
so I swung and hit the fence.
A couple of rifle bullets went
through the back window
of their unmarked car.
Within a week or so Savard found out
that Dunie's friend John Slawvey.
who was the cop killer. was going
around boasting to the other guys
how he had shot at Savard
because of the problems he was
causing the West End Gang.
I knew who the guy was so we went to
arrest him -
there was no way we were going to
take any chances.
And that's when they laid a trap
to arrest Slawvey
at his apartment building.
I got two cops with me. young cops.
They were never involved
in any shootings.
So they gonna be nervous. you know.
especially a guy like that.
He killed a cop.
He doesn't mind killing cops.
So we waited in the garage
till he got in. you know.
just like an old movie.
You hear the car going in.
It takes a long time. you don't hear
anything - what's going on.
you know?
And then we start hearing steps.
The guy is walking. I can hear him.
So when he comes I yell at him
"Police" and then he stops
and looks at me and he said:
"I'm not armed. I'm not armed".
so I move forward. you know.
Then all I can remember and I seen
something shiny in his coat.
right here and then he made a move.
Well I had to make a decision and
it was a quick decision.
I don't know if it's a gun.
you know. I shot him.
And then I heard...
My two partners - they shot him.
so he fell down.
They put something like 27 bullets
into John Slawvey.
His girlfriend later said he was
reaching for his cigarettes.
That he didn't have a gun with him.
The investigation found that there
was a gun lying beside Slawvey's
body
The investigation found that there
was a gun lying beside Slawvey's
body
but another cop told me "Of course
there would be a gun there.
It probably was a throw away."
But I know it was.
because I was there.
There can be many different
suspicions. you know.
maybe you shouldn't have shot him.
maybe a lot of things
I shouldn't have done
but I didn't take a chance.
I'm alive and he's dead.
I did what I had to do.
I would have been stupid to do
anything otherwise because
I would have been killed if not
there somewhere else.
maybe another cop
would have been killed.
I've got no regrets.
Dunie and Slawvey were great pals
and people in the West End Gang were
really upset by the way he died.
they felt he was murdered by Savard.
That was a bad scene.
Then there was a $50.000 contract
put out on Savard's life.
Dunie Ryan certainly
wanted our heads.
And Savard himself
had to be protected.
I had a .44 Magnum
which Dirty Harry had.
I always put my .44 Magnum
under the bed.
We are not easy targets. you know.
So we are not going to let ourselves
get killed
without defending ourselves.
Montreal had Allo Police -
a weekly crime tabloid.
I was fascinated by it.
The Head of the West End Gang.
My father got me a job at
The Montreal Gazette as a copy boy.
As a journalist. I veered into crime
and became an investigative
crime reporter.
I did a magazine story
about Dunie Ryan.
And this was a really interesting
figure because what he was doing
was fairly sophisticated.
That story was important to
my career and it led to
other stories unfolding.
I have never seen these
photos before.
It took a long time to find small
pieces of information about Dunie.
Because he was
a very evasive criminal.
That's what he needed to be.
That was part of what made him great
at what he did.
O'CONNOR: In the 1980's.
the West End Gang was getting
involved in more serious crimes
that just robbing a bank
here and there.
Dunie Ryan realised the big money
to be made was in drugs.
I think the secret of the
West End Gang is that an opportunity
came and they saw it.
They are the right people
at the right time in the right place
and they realise this.
and that was the key.
In the 80's it was like everybody
was suddenly selling
and doing cocaine.
There was. like. an explosion of it.
Everybody loved coke. The dark side
of cocaine hadn't kicked in yet.
This very. very desired product
was coming in containers
and everyone had to get it through
that Port and they had to ask
permission from the West End Gang.
REPORTER: 26 tonnes found at
the port of Montreal.
Quebec Police investigators
determined it belonged to a group
of suspected drug traffickers
known as the Matticks clan.
Well. the Matticks family has been
interesting every police department
ever since we're police officers.
The Port of Montreal was controlled
by the Irish Mob
and Gerald Matticks was in charge of
hiring people.
He was the lynchpin.
Everyone knew Gerry Matticks and
Dunie Ryan worked hand in hand
together.
Everyone knew Gerry Matticks and
Dunie Ryan worked hand in hand
together.
I've covered Hells Angels leaders in
trials. I've covered Mafia leaders.
Gerry Matticks was different.
Gerry Matticks had personality
that I never saw in any of the other
criminals that I have covered.
He had a sense of humour.
He had charisma.
There was something about him that
made you smile even though
you knew that he could stick a shiv
in your back as easily as not.
What Matticks would later say is.
on any given day I could just touch
the side of my nose and a container
that was up on a crane could go on
the right truck that would get out
of the Port without being inspected.
The port of Montreal was the first
choice for many drug traffickers
because once it lands in Montreal.
it's a real launching point
to where you wanted
to distribute your cocaine.
The open door to the importation of
narcotics in Canada
and in the United States.
It passes through Montreal
to go to New York.
Cocaine changed what were
formally small gangs.
And that's why the West End Gang
suddenly came to light
as a major player
in the Montreal underworld.
The battle amongst all of these
organised crime groups to control
the cocaine industry
exploded into gangland slayings
and corruption seemed to creep into
every aspect of the city.
Montreal...
These days a city of many coffins.
By Victoria Day.
a hundred murders in Quebec.
Things got so bad that
the government was forced to set up
a public inquiry
into organised crime
and suddenly the ugliness
just came to the surface.
It's a frightening picture of
underworld operations
and the operators.
A nightly TV show in
Quebec featuring a police inquiry
and starring a host of lawyers
and gangsters.
Underworld figures whose faces were
barely known are becoming as
familiar as the Montreal Canadiens.
It was a big hit. you got
a Crime Commission that's filming
testimonies of gangsters.
Yeah. it's a hell of a reality show.
They hauled Dunie Ryan and
Gerry Matticks
in front of the Commission
but they see them as
truck hijackers. bank robbers
and money launderers.
They miss the fact that they have
now become the biggest drug dealers.
far out shining the Mafia
and the French Canadian gangs.
When Dunie was called up to testify.
he said. "I bury my money in
the ground." and in fact he did.
So obviously they don't have enough
evidence to charge him with
anything.
So they slip away into their own
dark area without anybody
really understanding that the status
of these gangs is now altered
to a point where real power is
with The West End Gang.
The Italians and the biker gangs had
been the main distributors of
cocaine.
These upstart Irish guys started
muscling in on their territory.
There were threats made for them
to stay out of the business.
The Irish wouldn't take that
lying down.
They just continued to expand
the business.
This flood of cocaine poured into
the Ports...
..a huge challenge for the RCMP
because we are dealing with
international drug smuggling
of a serious drug
that is bringing unbelievable
amounts of money in
and exiting out of the country.
Half a ton of cocaine was
introduced as evidence at the trial.
500 kilos that came all the way from
South America destined for
the New York market.
The cocaine never got there -
the RCMP got their hands on it
first.
The cocaine never got there -
the RCMP got their hands on it
first.
And the man who was at the head
of this investigation
was Claude Savoie.
We all have different theories on
things but until you see something.
This proves that large
quantities do come in -
500 kilos. again. is the largest
seizure ever made in Canada.
He was considered a good cop.
a clean cop
and he was respected by the people
who worked for him.
Everybody liked him. good guy.
backed you up. all the rest of it.
I met Savoie.
we started a joint project with
the Montreal Police Drug Squad
and the RCMP.
And I found Savoie to be a good guy.
a comfortable guy to be with.
They've got this small little gang
that suddenly pops out
and becomes a major player in
cocaine and now Claude Savoie
has to be looking at Dunie Ryan.
The power and reach of the West End
Gang was growing quite significantly
so they made sure they
had the kind of lawyer
with the brazen talent
and connections within
the justice system
they needed to help protect
their criminal empire.
And that man was Sidney Leithman
I can't say that.
it's not because a warrant is
issued that the man is guilty.
The first time I saw
Sidney Leithman.
I was in a courtroom and he walked
in and suddenly the room was
full of Sidney Leithman.
I mean this guy was sort of
a pastiche of some kind of
Brooklyn mob Lawyer with
the aviator glasses.
Sidney Leithman was my lawyer.
I got found not guilty on
a few cases. Great lawyer.
He was a fixer.
He had a lot of judges.
having judges makes cases a lot
easier for you.
You're saying he had
judges in his pocket?
Yup. Oh for sure.
for sure. for sure.
We knew at some point that Leithman
was very friendly with one judge.
He was renting apartments for him
every once in a while.
he even had a girl.
ya know. a prostitute.
And eventually. he became the lawyer
to a major Montreal crime boss.
Frank Cotroni.
At the time. the Cotronis were
the most powerful Mafia family
in Montreal.
Whatever he has done in the past.
he has paid for that
and it shouldn't affect him today.
If you were caught and you were a
member of the underworld of
Montreal.
they cry would go out
"Get me Leithman".
He represented the Italian mafia
guys. the Hell's Angels guys
and the West End Gang.
I don't know what
the right answer is?
Sidney became the corporate
lawyer for the West End Gang.
He was always there for them.
any time. 24 hours a day.
seven days a week.
That was Sidney Leithman.
Dunie Ryan appreciated him so much
that he gave him an Irish Claddagh
ring.
Dunie Ryan appreciated him so much
that he gave him an Irish Claddagh
ring.
Dunie Ryan really wanted to create
a bond among the people
who worked underneath him and he
made each of them a Claddagh ring.
It's a symbol. it's a heart and it's
two hands pulling on either side
of the heart.
Leithman said.
"I'm probably the only Jew in the
city that is wearing one of these
rings."
"I'm probably the only Jew in the
city that is wearing one of these
rings."
He was very proud of it and he used
to show it to everybody in court.
He was like a made-man
with that ring.
For him to give that ring to
Sidney Leithman.
to me it's a sign that
a) I trust you.
b) it's possible that Mr Leithman
was facilitating his crimes.
He got involved in levels of drug
dealing that he should have never
ever been a part of.
And once you do that.
you are caught by this group now.
You are no longer their lawyer.
you're their slave.
The Brinks robbery was something
that ate at Andre Savard for years.
Andre would not let go of it.
I'm mad at them like hell.
so I am going to put them in jail.
arrest them. That's my vengeance.
After the Brinks hold-up
police combed the city for clues.
Police killed suspect
John Slawvey in a shootout.
Four years later police raided
this house on Greene Avenue.
Under these floorboards they found
almost $290.000.
believed part of the Brinks loot.
Slawvey lived at
the Greene avenue house.
That was one crime that really got
under his skin.
Eight years later.
he finally caught most of the
perpetrators of the Brink robbery.
The indictment charges
five persons with conspiracy
and armed robbery about $3 million.
Only the small fry who were involved
in it get tried and sentenced.
The leaders of the Brinks robbery.
the guys who put it together.
get off scot free.
Not guilty? Tabarnac. not guilty?
That was worse than
the O.J. Simpson case.
This was unbelievable.
What the hell do you want. you know?
So...
So in 1984.
after the Brink's investigation.
I decided that it was time for me
to go to the top job
where I think being a homicide cop
was at the top.
Many years ago. my mother had to
send me to an orphanage.
I always had a tendency
to stand up for the little guy.
I had to defend them.
you know. somehow.
Being a cop. the best way to do this
would be to stop people from
killing each other.
And it became like an obsession.
Dunie Tyan would operate and hold
court in various motels
in the West end of Montreal.
He spends a lot of time hanging out
at Nitillo's on Upper Lachine Road.
When I was 15 years old.
I got my first real job
as a busboy at Nittolo's.
And it was a very respected place
but there was also
a criminal element to it.
That's where members of
the West End Gang.
most of them Irish guys. would come
and pay homage to Dunie Ryan.
He was very generous
with his cohorts.
And if they got out of jail Dunie
right away would give the guy money
to buy new clothes.
a couple of grams of cocaine.
And he would keep their loyalty
that way.
What made him. Dunie.
a good crime boss?
He had a good gang.
He just had good people around him
that supported him.
Dunie is running
this powerful business.
He has a very nice home.
and a 30-foot power yacht
where he entertained his cronies.
The money had become almost
a joke to the guys.
It was that much money.
that was the legend.
I think there was always
the idea that
"Hey you could be living this dream.
you could be living this life."
They sold that dream very well and
the younger people who were
at the bottom looked up to them
and thought they were so cool
and be like them one day
and they bought the lie.
They lived the high life
in every way.
And meanwhile none of that trickled
down back to the people
who were working for them.
Wow. it hasn't changed.
My bedroom was right up there.
They didn't share any of
that wealth.
They got to live this lifestyle that
the people in The Point
could only dream of.
Dunie Ryan might have been
an honest thief.
as a lot of people called him.
however if you crossed Dunie.
there could be hell to pay.
Patrick McGurnaghan was a mid-level
member of the West End Gang.
He owed Dunie about 200.000 bucks
and every time Dunie tried to
collect.
He owed Dunie about 200.000 bucks
and every time Dunie tried to
collect.
McGurnaghan would blow him off.
Dunie hired Apache Trudeau
who is a Hells Angels guy
also known as the Mad Bomber.
He was basically a psychopath.
But he was very handy to be hired
if you wanted somebody killed.
Apache Trudeau planted a bomb
underneath McGurnaghan's car
with a radio device
that would detonate the bomb.
McGurnaghan gets in his car
and starts driving...
..turns the corner near a park
and a school.
The white 1977 Mercedes
Benz was travelling south about
quarter to one this afternoon.
Suddenly a loud explosion. the car
blew apart and came to stop
off the side of the road
150 feet away.
The man just fell out and his arms
and legs were blown off.
And that was the end of McGurnaghan.
Dunie had made an example of him.
And the word was out very quickly -
you do not fuck with Dunie.
In that period of time.
I was a homicide cop
and I was involved with an informer
that the West End Gang
was trying to kill.
The West End Gang had a lot
of power. complete power.
because people in The Point knew
there was no line
they wouldn't cross.
Because we were so close to the
tracks we could see them bringing
a body that they would be able to
distribute along the train track
because the train can do a lot of
damage to a body
and get rid of the parts.
When I was a kid. I came to look
after the train had gone by
and lying on the dirt
not far from the track.
I wasn't sure at first what it was.
and then I realised it
was a hand and sort of kicked it
a bit with my foot and thought
"Wow".
I mean the fingertips were
still attached.
it was a complete
hand that hadn't even been crushed.
Violence like that.
it breeds more violence.
By 1984. Dunie Ryan
is looking over his shoulder.
wondering how safe
his perch might be.
because he knows people
are jealous of him.
Dunie had worth
between 50 and 100 million
and he did express his concerns
about his own safety
and he was worried about his kids
being possibly kidnapped.
The West End Gang was splitting
in some ways. you know?
Everybody wanted to take over.
That's the way criminals are.
you know. They want to take over.
In that world. it's a vicious world.
It can come from anywhere.
Dunie rides to meet up
with some members of his gang
in the bar at Nittolo's.
That was where he hung out.
did business.
he wouldn't think twice about
something happening to him there.
As Dunie is sitting there.
a fellow by the name of Paul April
approaches his table.
And he owes Dunie Ryan $200.000
and he's scared.
He invites Dunie to a room
at the motel
where he says he's going to pay him.
give him the money.
Dunie says "OK. let's go."
And off they go to Room 40.
They walk in there
and out of the bathroom
steps a friend of Paul April's
with a shotgun in his hand.
Dunie knows he's doomed
unless he gets out of there.
He's gotta fight his way
out of there or he's finished.
So he picked up the chair
and smashed it into the window
to make a break for it.
He went down swinging.
One of Paul April's henchmen
blasts Dunie Ryan in the chest.
blows him away.
'Reputed West End
cocaine dealer Peter Dunie Ryan
was shot to death in a motel
on Upper Lachine Road.
Who did it is anybody's guess.
but it had to be someone
Ryan trusted
Who did it is anybody's guess.
but it had to be someone
Ryan trusted
for a killer or killers
to get so close to him
with a 12-gauge shotgun
and a .45 calibre pistol.'
He died at 42.
It's a very young age.
Dunie wanted to "Live Fast.
Love Hard and Die Young."
If that was his motto in life.
then all three wishes came true.
unfortunately.
Dunie's funeral was here.
Just not too far away
was where he was killed
and where he did a lot of business.
Dunie Ryan for me was close to home.
I worked at Nittolo's as a kid.
I shot pool as a teenager
at Smitty's. a big hangout of his.
There's more of a familiarity.
a character
that you're reporting on.
when they've covered the same turf
as you.
that you're reporting on.
when they've covered the same turf
as you.
The loveable anti-hero.
Maybe he struck that chord in me.
One of the things about the West End
Gang that I think is terrible
is how much
we want to romanticise them.
I always thought
they were pieces of shit.
I don't know why people
looked up to them. I would look
at them
and think. "Fuck you. You're not
the hero that you think you are.
or that you want to pretend
you are."
They were bullies who were just
taking advantage of people
who were vulnerable.
A lot of them are not nice people.
The criminal world is a fucked up
world. there is no doubt about it.
When Dunie Ryan was killed.
Allan Ross. just by the vacancy.
the vacuum of power. swung in.
'Allan Ross started out
running errands for Dunie Ryan.
He spent a lot of nights
at this West End motel
watching Ryan collect millions
from drug-running.'
You could stop Allan Ross
on the street and you could see
the hate in his eyes for police.
you could see it
while talking to him. You know.
that scar he had on his face
and his beady eyes looking at you.
He was a violent human being
and if he wanted something.
I believe he would have killed you
for it.
Allan Ross would destroy you
if you're not careful.
He was considered
a nasty piece of work.
His nickname was The Weasel.
Some say it's because
he looked like a ferret.
He tried to get away
with everything. he tried not to be
involved in things and if he was
involved he'd be in the back.
They called him The Weasel
for a reason. you know.
Paul April is out in the East End
at a bar bragging about it
with his buddies.
saying. "The King is dead.
Dunie Ryan is dead
and now I'm the king."
I mean. it's laughable. Who are you?
Allan Ross knew who was involved
in Dunie Ryan's murder
and he set about getting them.
Paul April was staying with his gang
in the apartment on De Maisonneuve.
They knew that the gang
was looking. especially Allan Ross
was looking for him
to avenge Dunie Ryan.
It's four in the morning.
Paul April and three of his cronies
are holed up in this apartment.
They're doing coke.
they are having a good time.
There's a knock on the door
and who's at the door
but Apache Trudeau?
He's got a gift for Paul April.
It's a video recorder...
..with a tape called 'The History
of the Hell's Angels in Montreal.'
Aren't you a little suspicious
about this at four in the morning?
That it's Apache Trudeau.
for heaven's sake.
You know who this guy is...
... this legendary mass bomber
for the Hell's Angels.
Paul April puts the VCR down
and Apache Trudeau leaves.
A little while later
he turns on the VCR.
They put the tape inside.
It's been wired by Apache Trudeau
so that after it's played
for a couple of minutes...
The windows come screaming out
onto the street.
Half the floor is gone.
'There was
so much damage.
firemen had to use an aerial crane
'There was
so much damage.
firemen had to use an aerial crane
to remove the four bodies.'
'They are now saying
that a full-scale gang war
may now be underway.
because two of the four men
in room 917 when the ten-pound
dynamite bomb exploded
were believed to be
part of the Ryan organisation.'
It's a huge bomb.
a lot of C4 packed into it
and it blows the occupants
of the apartment to smithereens.
Paul April's face is gone.
most of his body is gone.
At the time they didn't really know
what had happened and they thought
that because his chest
was blown away
he had been making a bomb that was
going to be strapped to his body.
'Yves Apache Trudeau
took part in 43 murders
as a Hell's Angels hitman
in the '70s and '80s.
sometimes with guns.
sometimes with bombs.
A violent man.
even by biker standards.'
Police confirmed from Apache Trudeau
that he was hired by Allan Ross
to plant that bomb
in Paul April's apartment.
Luckily for Allan Ross. he was
never charged for that murder.
because it was really
Apache Trudeau's word
against Allan Ross's word.
because it was really
Apache Trudeau's word
against Allan Ross's word.
I got in touch with Allan Ross
to find out his take on the story
of what happened and whether
he was involved and so on.
He wrote me back. "There was
only two things that could happen
when Dunie got killed.
I was gonna get killed
or the people responsible
for Dunie's death
were gonna get killed.
or the people responsible
for Dunie's death
were gonna get killed.
Paul was in a tavern
bragging that he had killed the king
and Paul was looking to see
which way the wind was blowing.
And 13 days later. it was
blowing him to hell. Ha-ha!!"
So one by one
in a very systematic way.
Allan Ross took out everybody
involved in Dunie Ryan's murder.
Because as the saying goes.
three people can keep a secret
only if two of them are dead.
This was bound to happen
because there was war
inside the gang itself.
The organised crime groups.
they destroy themselves.
They don't care about anybody
but themselves.
And at the end of it all.
Allan Ross had finally secured
his own position
as the new king of
the West End Gang.
with his own people.
his own structure
and his own way of doing business.
'Ross went on to make more.
much more.
Under his command the West End Gang
forged a partnership
with the Sicilian Mafia
and Colombia's cocaine cartels.'
I became the lead attorney
for the organised crime task force
in north Florida. At that time
every big criminal organisation
on Planet Earth was in drugs
coming out of Colombia.
We worked the Colombian cartels hard
and the cartel
that I was primarily interested
in was better armed
and in greater numbers
than the Colombian army.
So we're watching everything they do
and lo and behold there's this guy
from Montreal that shows up.
Allan Ross. It's like. "What the
heck is going on with that?"
So we start digging.
'By the mid 1980s.
Florida drug agents
began secretly investigating Ross.'
For a Canadian to go down
and make direct contact
with the Colombian Cartel guys.
I had never seen that before.
We indicted Allan Ross
for being the lead figure
to traffic in illegal drugs
in the United States. Canada
and elsewhere. You seal
the indictment
so they don't know
you are coming for them.
'Narcotics worth hundreds
of millions have been seized
in Montreal
'Narcotics worth hundreds
of millions have been seized
in Montreal
during the past 11 months.
but no-one has been arrested.
Inside the container. agents found
a fortune in narcotics.
but no-one claimed it.
perhaps because the dealers knew
or suspected that they were
under police surveillance.'
Ross knew how to play the system.
He was able to stay ahead
of the justice system in Canada.
It was embarrassing
and you had to ask yourself
what was wrong with the Canadians
that they couldn't get this guy?
He's been around for 20 years
doing drugs in Montreal.
Nobody had the answer at the time.
And nobody believed at the time
that it could possibly be
who it ended up being.
'Sidney Leithman. lawyer.
and specialist in defending
against major crime charges.'
'Does any one of you know of
a murder that hasn't happened yet?
Somebody who is a victim that.
in your opinion.
is going to be killed?'
'I'm not going to answer that.'
'If you wanted a lawyer killed.
how much do you think
you would have to have in the bank
to get it done?'
'I wouldn't even think.
I wouldn't know.'
There's a basic rule
for journalists and lawyers
when dealing with underworld guys.
you don't get too close.
Nothing is personal here. you don't
go out and drink with them.
You don't get involved
in anything they are involved with.
that sort of thing.
You keep your distance. You do it
for your own safety. And. uh.
Leithman didn't understand that.
We look for the crooked lawyers.
we look for the crooked cops
and Leithman was in our sights.
He was an important appendage
to Ross's organisation.
He's the guy that told witnesses
to keep their mouth shut.
he's the one that made the deals
with witnesses.
that if you keep your mouth shut
you'll get paid. the guy that
advised Ross. when he had a problem.
who was talking.
you'll get paid. the guy that
advised Ross. when he had a problem.
who was talking.
He is no longer a defence lawyer.
he is a felon
conspiring to obstruct justice.
'He made headlines taking
on Colombian cartel characters
as clients
and usually got them off.'
He was very well liked
by the cartels down in Colombia.
He liked the fact
that they would fly him down.
provide him with money. drugs
and women. whatever he wanted.
I think that Leithman
got sucked into a couple of files
with the Colombians for the money.
then he got too deep.
There were rumours that he was
doing coke himself
and if you have an addiction
to any kind of drugs.
you become less trusted.
'Police intercepted a cargo plane
from Medellin. Colombia.
It contained half a ton of cocaine.'
By 1989. the Colombians were
starting to lose faith on Leithman.
He was losing cases.
They were blaming Leithman
for the fact
they had lost millions of dollars
in the cocaine being seized.
His dealings
with those types of people.
I mean. if you're doing court cases.
you'd better win them.
And he wasn't winning them.
There was this sense with him
of making promises he can't keep
and just a man
who you could no longer trust.
And in that world.
if you can no longer trust somebody.
that's the end.
'Sidney Leithman was just
five blocks from his house
when he was shot in the head
this morning. Family members
were on the scene quickly.
shocked. standing barefoot
in the street.
Investigators found some
shell casings on the ground
and they found a bullet
in the grass opposite the car.
They say it went through
the passenger side car window.
hit Leithman. went through
the driver's side window
and then came to a scorching stop
in the grass.'
To this day. we have no idea
who killed Sidney Leithman.
This was a man who was involved
with so many different
underworld figures in his life.
You never know when or where
or from whom
the bullet is going to come.
He'd been involved with
the Columbians. with the Mafia
and with the Hell's Angels.
And of course he was also deeply
involved with the West End Gang
and Allan Ross.
Did he offend somebody.
did he go too far?
Was he working too much
with the competition?
You just never know.
that's why it's the underworld.
So unless somebody
actually comes out and confesses.
I'm not sure we will ever find out
what the real story is
behind Sidney Leithman's death.
In the summer of '92 I was working
for the CBC TV programme
'The Fifth Estate.'
It's the Canadian equivalent
to '60 Minutes.'
it's a great investigative TV show.
My job was to develop stories
and there were some interesting
developments going on
with the drug trade
and the West End Gang.
Dan has great contacts
with the police.
but he also has great contacts
with the crime community.
So when Dan Burke comes to me
and says. "Hey. we should do
the story on the West End Gang.
it was a natural
for us to work on it together.
How is it that Allan Ross
gets away for so many years
being one of the most powerful
drug traffickers in North America?
It doesn't take Dan long
to begin to hear whispers.
Everybody knew Allan Ross
was a criminal and a crime boss.
The question was.
why wasn't he getting arrested?
And the key there
was Sidney Leithman.
So then the question was.
who did Sidney Leithman have
in the police and the judiciary?
When big boys don't get arrested.
it's because they have friends.
It was standard fare for us.
It wasn't a big question mark.
The question mark was who. not if.
You can probably investigate
Montreal for corruption
at any point in history
and have several stories.
But I was left with the impression
that it was unusual
how they were operating at the RCMP
drug squad in Montreal under Savoie.
'So this confirmed to us.
because you have to have
some evidence
to believe something...'
Claude Savoie for many years
was the head of the RCMP drug squad.
So we're journalists.
we go wherever the leads lead us.
Claude Savoie and I met
at an office
at the RCMP headquarters.
And I had a two-hour conversation
with him.
I got the sense that he was
a little nervous.
a little exasperated.
Under pressure.
Well. everybody in the world
knew Allan Ross was a problem.
And this guy is telling me
"Well. Allan Ross isn't a problem."
Jeez. You don't even
have to be a cop to know that.
So if Allan Ross isn't a problem.
then maybe Claude Savoie
is a problem. you know?
'This is RCMP Inspector
Claude Savoie in late 1990
when he was head of the RCMP
drug squad in Montreal.
He's talking about why the police
were losing ground to drug dealers.'
'Well. I am not sure
I can answer that question.
Because if I could answer
that question. we could probably
solve the problem
and unfortunately we're not doing
a good job at solving the problem
right now.'
and unfortunately we're not doing
a good job at solving the problem
right now.'
Not a doubt in my mind
that Claude Savoie would do anything
illegal or hurt the RCMP
or hurt law enforcement. period.
He had a family
and he was just a good guy.
We start meeting
with police sources.
who are careful.
because they are police.
But they encourage us
to keep digging.
I asked Savoie about his
relationship with Leithman.
Well. he does acknowledge
the relationship
with Sidney Leithman.
because that was true.
They were strange bedfellows.
We keep digging and we find out
that Claude Savoie
meets in a downtown restaurant
with Allan Ross and Sidney Leithman.
Then we find out from a source
that right above that restaurant
is Sidney Leithman's office
and Claude Savoie meets alone
with Allan Ross.
I know the guy is not going to
confess to me. there is no way.
So I try to find out if he's lying.
if I can prove that he's lying
about something.
And I asked him. "How many times
did you meet with Allan Ross?"
and he told me once.
And I said to him. "Just once?"
and he said. "Yeah. just once."
I knew it was two times.
so he's lying.
Why is he lying?
It's a symptom of corruption.
The lie is a symptom of corruption.
What access to information
that gave Allan Ross!
That was astounding.
I mean. I've seen
lots of corrupt cops
in the United States. but I've never
seen anyone at that level.
That was something.
That was extraordinary.
Allan Ross has a base in Florida.
He's got a condo down there.
he's got a yacht.
He conducts business
down in Florida.
He has to know what the Americans
have on him.
But by May 1991.
Sidney Leithman gets whacked.
so Allan Ross doesn't have a choice.
He's gotta deal directly
with his man inside the RCMP.
Claude Savoie.
He is Allan Ross's friend
inside law enforcement.
And Savoie calls out of the blue
asking us all these questions.
and he's asking questions
he should not be asking.
He's trying to find out information
on a grand jury indictment
which is secret. It is sealed
by a court.
He was trying to use his status
as a Mountie to get information
from federal agents in Florida.
Claude Savoie tells Allan Ross
the Americans are looking for him.
Yet Ross still goes down to Florida.
Why would he do that?
He was arrogant.
He thought he could get away with it
because he had gotten away with it
so many times.
He thought he could get away with it
because he had gotten away with it
so many times.
We got our guys in Montreal
watching him to alert us
when he actually does come down.
And sure enough he came to Florida.
Huge mistake.
'This US Marshall shows us how
on October 7th 1991.
he arrested
Canada's biggest drug baron.'
'I came behind him like this
with my gun out here. advising him.
"Broward Sheriff Office.
put your hands on top of your head."
As we were just about to
the Marshal's office
where I was taking him.
he told me or he said to me.
"Well. it would sure be nice
if I could give you like
$200.000 and you'd let me go."
Not that I would. He said it
in a way that I couldn't get him
with bribery.
Not that I would. He said it
in a way that I couldn't get him
with bribery.
but I had no doubt if I had said OK.
I'd be $200.000 richer right now.'
The trial is one of those
classic scenes.
We're trying him
in a small federal court
in Gainesville. Florida. We had
looked at Allan Ross's history
of violence
in Gainesville. Florida. We had
looked at Allan Ross's history
of violence
and we brought in a special team
from the U.S. Marshall service.
We've got dogs. dope dogs.
bomb dogs.
we've got snipers
on the roof of the courthouse
to make sure that he does not
interrupt this trial.
When you're in the courthouse
seeing a guy who is responsible
for ordering numerous murders
over the years.
you sort of go in there
and you're looking for something.
something in the man's face
in a way that will reveal
this person
in his full gangster glory
and you're always disappointed.
There's nothing there.
there's just nothing there.
'Ross was found guilty of conspiring
to import and traffic
over 10.000 kilos of cocaine
and 300 tons of marijuana.'
It's Monday. December 21st. 1992.
just a few days before Christmas.
there is snow on the ground.
you got Santa Claus
all over the streets.
and the lights
and the Christmas trees.
and two internal investigators
of the RCMP show up
at Ottawa headquarters.
They want to speak to Claude Savoie.
The RCMP knows we're going to air
on Tuesday. they know
what we're investigating
and on Monday morning.
of all the days in the year.
what we're investigating
and on Monday morning.
of all the days in the year.
of all the time
they are investigating Savoie.
they go meet Claude Savoie
on the Monday before we go to air.
They go into a room and they want
Savoie to come into that room.
You know. the room is ready to tape.
video. the whole thing.
for this interview.
Savoie doesn't show up.
They get a little impatient.
they walk down to his office.
they open the door...
.. and they find Savoie
sprawled across his desk
with a bullet in his head.
He had shot himself
with his service revolver
which he had wrapped
in the sleeve of his jacket
to muffle the noise.
And that was the end of Savoie.
'Savoie killed himself
shortly before he was supposed
to meet with
'Savoie killed himself
shortly before he was supposed
to meet with
internal affairs investigators
at RCMP headquarters in Ottawa.
The CBC's 'The Fifth Estate'
had been preparing
an investigative report
on the failures
of the Montreal drug squad.'
Wow. That was big news to me.
you know.
It was a hell of a development.
At The Fifth Estate we had
an expression. "the smoking gun."
Well. that might have been
the first time ever
we had a literal smoking gun.
Well. that might have been
the first time ever
we had a literal smoking gun.
For you. his suicide was proof
of Claude Savoie's guilt?
Yeah. without a question. I mean.
obviously the guy
couldn't face the music.
And that's how it ended for him.
You don't feel any guilt in that?
We were doing our job
as reporters. but if you and I
hadn't started the story.
hadn't investigated the story.
Claude Savoie would be alive.
Do you ever feel any guilt
about that?
No. not at all.
It may seem cold-blooded. but...
.. yeah. I'd be faking it
if I said I felt bad about it.
He made his own bed and. you know...
and that's how he decided
to lie in it.
He made his own bed and. you know...
and that's how he decided
to lie in it.
He couldn't face it.
He just couldn't face it. you know?
I was shocked at what he did.
His guilt. his guilt.
Just too much.
Did he get money off of Leithman.
did he put other cops' lives
in danger? Obviously he did.
He betrayed me. because I was
a cop and a friend of his.
'This is how the Mounties react
to allegations of corruption
within their Montreal drug squad
and the suicide
of its former commander.
within their Montreal drug squad
and the suicide
of its former commander.
a press release saying
they are looking into the matter.
No questions accepted.'
They were investigating
Claude Savoie. We didn't know that.
And they were closing in on him
and they were worried
about our investigation.
'Suspicion first fell
on Inspector Savoie
after the May. 1991 murder
of Sidney Leithman.
a Montreal lawyer known for
defending and socialising with
Colombian drug barons.
When the police go through
his clothes. in his back pocket
they find
a handwritten phone number...
.. to the guy who heads
the RCMP drug squad in Montreal.
Claude Savoie.
So Savoie is dead. the RCMP
continue their investigation
for another year. they bust into
his bank accounts.
his safety deposit boxes.
They find $200.000.
They concluded he had been paid off
over time by the West End Gang
for information.
The West End Gang felt
they were above the law.
They were corrupting police.
corrupting lawyers.
And in the process they were
corrupting the whole system.
The thing with drug organisations.
it's not just the drugs.
the major problem is the power
they get from the money.
These people
produced enormous amounts of money.
Money on this planet is power
and power corrupts.
A lot of the guys
who worked for Dunie Ryan are dead.
All the guys who killed Dunie Ryan
are dead.
Sidney Leithman is dead. Allan Ross
is in jail in the United States.
There's been a cleansing.
a pretty bloody cleansing
of the West End Gang. and the man
who rises out of that pool
is Gerry Matticks.
Either he must have felt
really lucky or he felt invincible
and he's operating now
at the highest levels.
he is talking to the highest people
in the Hell's Angels
and that I think was his downfall.
'Police fanned out
across the province.
swooping down and arresting
120 bikers and their associates.'
'560 police officer involved
in 70 raids across the province
in 24 municipalities.'
The police arrested
Gerry Matticks in 2001.
'We believe with these arrests.
the West End Gang
is mainly out of order for a while.'
The guys still around
that I interviewed
from the West End Gang.
The guys still around
that I interviewed
from the West End Gang.
they were kinda sad.
They were kinda sad.
because a large part of their life
had been spent in prison.
They were not happy people.
They would say. "Yeah.
that was exciting at times.
but it wasn't worth it.
It was not worth it."
It was a world that I think a lot of
people got messed up with.
Yeah. of course.
A lot of individuals.
It's a sad story.
A lot of sad stories.
You know. it's sad. there are
no more old guys any more.
They are mostly all gone.
Most of the guys are gone.
I walked away and never went back.
I knew that if I ever went back
I would stay there.
I became a drug addict.
But I might have become
a drug addict anyway.
It's been a roller-coaster.
my life. But look at me now.
I could beat the devil.
Yeah. I did my bit. and that was
being a responsible journalist.
And. uh...
Looking at it now. I realise
there was so much violence.
but I wasn't thinking that
when I was growing up.
I'm OK.
Pursuing education
became my ticket out of poverty
and then I became a writer
and ended up writing two books
about growing up
in the neighbourhood.
Some of the gang members found out
about the book
and were really upset
and were sending me
all kinds of threatening emails.
I thought. "Kiss my ass."
Was it worth it. what I did.
was it really worth it what I did?
I don't think so.
It's worth it for some people.
if I succeeded in helping
some people.
then that's what the worth
is all about. The rest.
you won't change the system.
then that's what the worth
is all about. The rest.
you won't change the system.
They don't want somebody like me.
The system doesn't give a shit
about me. you know.
That's what I think.
It doesn't care.
When it comes to the underworld.
this is the way the story
always ends.
all the people are either dead
or in prison.
If there was anything special
about the West End Gang.
it is the speed at which they rose
and the speed at which they fell.
Through their own hubris.
through their own violence.
they fell just as fast as they rose.
And it happened almost overnight
in the annals of crime history.
The West End Gang thrived
because of powerful leaders
like Dunie Ryan. Allan Ross.
Gerry Matticks.
They needed those kinds of leaders
who had the connections.
the violence. the willingness
to do anything to hold on to power.
When those leaders were gone.
you still had some Irish gangsters
working at the port. but they could
never recapture that old glory.
When you have a city that has
a major port.
you're always going to have
one crime gang
that's gonna rise to the top.
It's just a matter of
who's the king.
Nobody wins a whole war
in organised crime.
There is no winner in that.
Nothing has changed.
'Most illegal drugs
coming to Canada
flow through Quebec.'
'... ce qu'il fait du port.
l'endroit ou la crime organise
est le plus actif au Quebec.'
'Former Montreal police officers
say they found evidence
of police corruption
within the force
and tried to report it.'
'The charges are very serious.
gangsterism. breach of trust
and obstruction of justice.'
'This network allegedly
imported 1.4 tonnes of cocaine.'
# SHANE MURPHY: 'Dirty Work'
AccessibleCustomerService@sky.uk